# calculatoR
R-shiny app that calculates BAC w/ other features 

Substance use, particularly alcohol use, is a pressing public health concern. About 56% of adults in the United States (US) report drinking alcohol over the past month, and almost 30% of adults report binge drinking during this timeframe (SAMHSA, 2015). Binge drinking is defined as a pattern of drinking that raises an individual’s blood alcohol concentration (BAC) to 0.08% or above (CDC). Binge drinking is associated with a number of physical and mental health problems, including accidents, violence, chronic diseases such as liver disease, impairments in learning and memory, and the development of alcohol dependence (WHO, 2018). 
Individuals generally have difficulty estimating their own BAC following a drink of alcohol. In particular, individuals who are severely intoxicated tend to underestimate their BAC (Grant, LaBrie, Hummer, & Lac, 2012). Individuals who underestimate their BAC are also more likely to engage in drunk driving due to lower self-ratings of intoxication and higher self-ratings of fitness to drive (Beirness, 1987; Laude & Fillmore, 2016). Drunk driving is particularly dangerous, as alcohol impairs driving skills and increases risk-taking behind the wheel (Laude & Fillmore, 2015). Further, alcohol is estimated to cause about 20-30% of motor-vehicle related deaths worldwide (WHO, 2003). Therefore, it is crucial for individuals to have a more accurate measure of BAC in order to motivate safer driving behavior following drinking.
BAC is often expressed as a percentage of alcohol in the blood, and is typically calculated using the clinically-accepted Widmark formula (Widmark, 1932). A number of online applications utilizing this formula exist for calculating BAC levels. However, they suffer from several limitations including imprecise measurements of alcohol content (most applications only consider a “standard” drink containing 10 grams of alcohol), lack of a time component (most applications assume alcohol intake is consistent over time), and use of average values for metabolism rates (gender impacts metabolism rates). In addition, other applications do not offer the user any information on how their BAC affects their ability to operate  a car, nor advise them when it would be safe to do so. This is important because even in the morning after a heavy night of drinking, it may be unsafe for an individual to drive. In fact, 10% of drunk driving arrests happen in the hours between 6 and 8 AM (NHTSA, 2017). 
It is evident that a more accurate and widely utilized application for BAC calculation is necessary to reduce the prevalence of drunk driving and its associated consequences. Further, an app that directly encourages users to take advantage of alternatives to impaired driving could motivate safer behavior among intoxicated individuals. Therefore, the goal of the current project was to design a user-friendly Shiny app that provides individuals with: (1) more precise estimations of BAC, relative to other extant BAC calculators; (2) a visualization of how an individual’s BAC will change over time; (3) a clear recommendation about an individual’s current ability to drive a vehicle; and (4) information about alternatives to driving, such as ride-sharing options like Uber.  
